52. Awake, awake, put on thy strength, O Zion, put on thy beautiful garments, O Jerusalem,
for henceforth there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised and the unclean. Shake
thyself from the dust, arise and sit down, O Jerusalem, loose thyself from the bands of
thy knack, O captive daughter of Zion. For thus saith the Lord, ye have sold yourselves for not,
and ye shall be redeemed without money. For thus saith the Lord God, My people went down a four
time into Egypt to sojourn there, and the Assyrian oppressed them without cause. Now therefore what
have I here, saith the Lord, that My people is taken away for not? They that rule over them
make them to howl, saith the Lord, and My name continually every day is blasphemed. Therefore
My people shall know My name, therefore they shall know in that day that I am He that doth
speak, behold it is I. How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of Him that bringeth good
tidings, that publisheth peace, that bringeth good tidings of good, that publisheth salvation,
that saith unto Zion, Thy God reigneth. Thy watchmen shall lift up the voice, with the voice
together shall they sing, for they shall see eye to eye when the Lord shall bring again Zion.
Break forth into joy, sing together ye waste places of Jerusalem, for the Lord hath comforted
His people, He hath redeemed Jerusalem. The Lord hath made bare His holy arm in the eyes of all
the nations, and all the ends of the earth shall see the salvation of our God. Depart ye, depart ye,
go ye out from thence, touch no unclean thing, go ye out of the midst of her, be ye clean,
that bear the vessels of the Lord. For ye shall not go out with haste, nor go by flight, for the
Lord will go before you, and the God of Israel will be your reward. Behold, My servant shall deal
prudently, he shall be exalted and extolled and be very high. As many were astonied at thee,
His visage was so marred more than any man, and His form more than the sons of men. So shall
He sprinkle many nations, the kings shall shut their mouths at Him, for that which had not been
told them shall they see, and that which they had not heard shall they consider.
Chapter 53 Who hath believed our report, and to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed? For
He shall grow up before Him as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground. He hath no
form nor comeliness, and when we shall see Him there is no beauty that we should desire Him.
He is despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief, and we hid,
as it were, our faces from Him. He was despised and we esteemed Him not. Surely He hath borne our
griefs and carried our sorrows, yet we did esteem Him stricken, smitten of God and afflicted.
But He was wounded for our transgressions, He was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement
of our peace was upon Him, and with His stripes we are healed. All we, like sheep, have gone astray,
we have turned every one to His own way, and the Lord hath laid on Him the iniquity of us all.
He was oppressed, and He was afflicted, yet He opened not His mouth. He is brought as a lamb
to the slaughter, and as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, so He openeth not His mouth.
He was taken from prison and from judgment, and who shall declare His generation? For He was cut
off out of the land of the living, for the transgression of My people was He stricken.
And He made His grave with the wicked and with the rich in His death, because He had done no
violence, neither was any deceit in His mouth. Yet it pleased the Lord to bruise Him, He hath put
Him to grief. When Thou shalt make His soul an offering for sin, He shall see His seed,
He shall prolong His days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in His hand. He shall see
the travail of His soul, and shall be satisfied. By His knowledge shall My righteous servant
justify many, for He shall bear their iniquities. Therefore will I divide Him a portion with the
great, and He shall divide the spoil with the strong, because He hath poured out His soul unto
death, and He was numbered with the transgressors, and He bare the sin of many and made intercession
for the transgressors. Chapter 54 Sing, O barren, thou that didst not bear, break forth into singing
and cry aloud, thou that didst not travail with child. For more are the children of the desolate
than the children of the married wife, saith the Lord. Enlarge the place of thy tent, and let them
stretch forth the curtains of thine habitations. Spare not, lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy
stakes. For thou shalt break forth on the right hand and on the left, and thy seed shall inherit
the Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. Fear not, for thou shalt not be ashamed,
neither be thou confounded, for thou shalt not be put to shame, for thou shalt forget the shame
of thy youth, and shalt not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more. For thy Maker is thine
husband, the Lord of hosts is His name, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, the God of the
earth shall He be called. For the Lord hath called thee as a woman forsaken and grieved in spirit,
and a wife of youth, when thou wast refused, saith thy God. For a small moment have I forsaken thee,
but with great mercies will I gather thee. In a little wrath I hid my face from thee for a moment,
but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, saith the Lord thy Redeemer.
For this is as the waters of Noah unto me, for as I have sworn that the waters of Noah
should no more go over the earth, so have I sworn that I would not be wroth with thee,
nor rebuke thee. For the mountains shall depart and the hills be removed, but my kindness shall
not depart from thee, neither shall the covenant of my peace be removed, saith the Lord that hath
mercy on thee. O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, and not comforted, behold, I will lay
thy stones with fair colors and lay thy foundations with sapphires, and I will make thy windows of
agates and thy gates of carbuncles and all thy borders of pleasant stones, and all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord and great shall be the peace of thy children. In righteousness
shalt thou be established, thou shalt be far from oppression, for thou shalt not fear,
and from terror, for it shall not come near thee. Behold, they shall surely gather together,
but not by me, whosoever shall gather together against thee shall fall for thy sake.
Behold, I have created the smith that bloweth the coals in the fire and that bringeth forth an
instrument for his work, and I have created the waster to destroy. No weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that shall rise against thee in judgment,
thou shalt condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord,
and their righteousness is of me, saith the Lord.